I think a lot of people think this is
actually what philosophy has come to the
conclusion of after 2,000 years is that
there's no such thing as the truth there
are only different points of view and
this is idea that there are you know a
huge number different perspectives we
come on days like these to hear them all
and suggest that some are true and
others are false or some might be better
than others you somehow elitist or
dogmatic totalitarian whatever it might
be pick your egalitarian insult of
choice there's something kind of
seductive about this idea it has a kind
of the air of a kind of democratic
pluralism but I think it is ultimately
an unsustainable one it leads if you
take it too seriously or too literally
to a kind of sloppy sludgy anything goes
relativism and no one really believes
that I mean if I was to say to you now
my belief is that you know Ted
organization is run by a lady for
intergalactic lizards in a conspiracy or
something she there are some people who
do believe that now you might say I'm
entitled to my opinion
but hopefully that doesn't mean you
think this opinion is any good you know
in saying that I respecting my right to
believe what I do is really respecting
my right to be bonkers it's not really
giving any credence to the belief but
nonetheless I think there is something
at the heart of this idea which is is
touching on is getting right so it's not
the case that there's no such thing as
the truth there are only different
points of view but it is the case that
there are many different points of view
and it's the sort of totality of the
true such point of view which is the
truth so the truth is nothing more than
a collection of those things this idea
is a very simple one in lots of ways but
it's often misunderstood misused and
it's important all sorts of things
including how we view ourselves now come
to that later but first of all I just
want to give a couple of examples of
what happens when you get to hold into
one particular point of view now here's
there's a two short examples this is a
survey I did many years ago is an online
survey so it's self selecting so it's
not really claiming to be representative
of the population as a whole but
nonetheless that wasn't as interested in
I was interested in what we could look
at if we took the people who answered
and divided between them so I asked
people what they complained about I gave
them various options this was the top
ten they came up with now let's do the
obvious thing let's see if it makes any
difference whether it's male or female
so the men they complained mainly about
things like ineffective politicians and
poor service and a public transport when
you ask women however significant
differences tended to complain more
about the cost of living and spouses and
partners and friends and also whether
enough they complained a lot less about
television I don't know what that tells
you now there you go this is a very
straightforward thing it seems to show
very significant gender differences aha
boys will be boys girls where he goes
etc let's take another quick example
this was something which was like an
online thought experiment a colleague of
mine a colleague of mine does this
people go and they engage in these
thought experiments he described this a
thousands of people have done this he
describes them a very particular
situation a very particular scenario and
asks people for their judgement in this
particular scenario and in this
situation he asked whether it was
morally wrong to have sex in the
situation where the partner will come to
regret it or whether it's morally wrong
to have sex if the part was intoxicated
albeit cogent and would not have had sex
otherwise and lo and behold well this is
what happens with the male answers 57%
thought the first action will be wrong
71 the second and in the second case 68
percent of the women 4 is wrong and 80
percent now with the the large numbers
of people taking part in this survey
this is a very highly statistically
significant difference ok
now I'm not for today's purposes
concerned with the validity or
interpretation of these two particular
examples are given I mean there might be
deeply flawed as experiments but that's
not really the point we all know about
this kind of thing there was lots of
different studies done many of them much
more scientific and rigorous than this
which show these systematic differences
in the tendencies of responses and
actions behaviors beliefs whatever of
men and women
and a lot of people some people don't
really like these results and they want
to challenge them and the answer comes
back well I'm sorry you know you can't
just oppose this because you don't like
it or B has an ideological objection
facts are facts data's data you just got
to live with it now to a certain extent
that's actually right a lot of the time
there is nothing wrong with the data
although has to be said there is still
quite a lot of dodgy data out there but
that doesn't mean there's no problem
with this kind of thing the problem with
this kind of thing though is not that
it's saying anything false the data
usually is perfectly sound the
conclusions of sound the problem is that
in each case what's happening is we're
looking at only one small part of the
picture and if you can't see how a part
of the picture fits into the hole then
you may as well be squinting at it no
matter how clear that part appears to
you so this is the sort of image I want
to work with here it's the idea that and
a familiar one I think that people will
say we always look at the world through
some kind of lens that's something we're
used to hearing and sometimes people
think well what that means is that we
never really see the world as it is we
always see the world distorted in some
way I think that's the wrong way of
reading that lens metaphor rather what
happens when you look through a lens is
if it's a good one is that it will bring
something of the world into sharp focus
and make it clear to us but almost
invariably it does so at the expense of
other things which are either out of the
frame altogether or blurred so I mean
simple analogy here this is a picture of
a keyboard and with the lens we're
looking at it here the foreground the
the end of the piano here is in
completely clear focus but the rest is
blurred you can then change the settings
or change the focus different parts
become into sharp focus and at the end
it's the end which is in focus and the
foreground which is blurred now in each
case there isn't a distortion in the
sense that that part of the picture
which is been which is perfectly in
focus is as it is
there's no falsehood there
the only way in which the image is
misleading is that what it's not
enabling us to see about other things so
the metaphor the analogy should be quite
clear if we think of the metaphorical
lenses we look at the world in well
there are numerous of them one is on a
given example of looking at it through
sex or gender now you look at the world
through that lens lo and behold what do
you see all sorts of very real
differences between populations of men
populations of women and those things
are there
they are real you're not being misled
only to the extent that everything else
he's often if you if you are sure of not
careful literally everything else is
blurred or not coming into focus you
switch lens you look at something else
like cash and lo and behold what do you
find you find that the income of
individuals and their wealth makes a
huge difference to all sorts of things
such as their educational outcome health
outcomes longevity reading habits all
sorts of things and if you if you look
at the world through that lens when
everything through that lens is being
brought into that focus it's very easy
to think wow you know money is the money
explains everything you know that's the
the key to understanding the world just
as obvious as it seemed to people who
were looking through the gender lens
it's all about sex and gender
there are lots and lots of other kind of
lenses as well of course jeans is a big
one and again if you look at the world
through that lens it can easily seem to
be the case that that really is the key
to unlocking everything and I think sex
you telling how much we kind of bought
into this but you know if you have
identical twins and one of them develops
breast cancer people go how the hell can
that happen there are tentacle twins
right as though obviously being
genetically identical there can't be any
difference between them what why would
anyone think that unless we become so
fixated with that aspect of reality that
genes but shot it sharply into focus
that we forget there were lots of other
lenses for looking at the world which
are extremely informative and we need to
look at and one of them of course is
culture sociologists anthropologists
look at that and that the whole sort of
rather tedious as it became nature
nurture debate I think there's probably
largely a consequence of the fact that
different researchers were seeing so
clearly aspects of the truth either to
do the genes are either to do with
culture they just found it kind of hard
to see how you needed both lenses to
bring them together to get the whole
picture
and that's really what the this is a
simple idea I'm trying to get across
here it's that it's only when you have a
whole variety of lenses and you avail
yourself of all that they can capture
you can see the truth of a situation
let's take a very very simple scene here
this is a little picture of a Victorian
woman in India now how do you understand
the totality of what's going on here
well you need to look through you need
to keep seeing lots and lots of
different lenses the gender lens there's
a lot of research which suggests that
women are actually more generous and
caring the men this is not some just a
stereotype there seems to be some truth
to it so if you look through the gender
lens that's perhaps what you will be
attended to if you look at the class
lens you might see it as this example of
noblesse elite orb leisure this is the
rich woman you know giving some of her
leftovers to the impoverished powerless
poor you look through a historical lens
and you'll see this as being capturing
something about a very particular point
in history in which the white
colonialists were lording it over the
indigenous population look at it through
a lens of social psychology and you
might actually be interested in one of
the particular aspects of this situation
which leads leaves the woman to give
whereas in other situations she wouldn't
and they say it's actually you know
forget about class history and so forth
how generous people are depends on
things like whether they're in a good
mood whether they're in a hurry and
whether or not they're being watched or
perhaps in this case photographed look
through the evolution lens you'll see
this is some kind of byproducts of
tit-for-tat cooperation which has taken
on a life of its own you look through
other lenses - what about her belief
system for a lot of people would say
we're missing something obvious here
this woman is a Christian she's
following Christ's teaching he who hath
two coats in part one - you have none if
you want ouster TV and philosopher you
might say let's look at this in terms of
the the character and habits of the
individuals involved and how that shaped
certain virtues
and if you're psychologists you might be
looking at aspects of personality which
perhaps were there through childhood
experience or we're born with now you
see what seems obvious once you step
back and think about it is that each of
these different lenses captures
something of the truth you don't have to
choose which one gives you the accurate
picture and no one by itself can give
you the accurate picture you need to
avail yourself of all of them if you are
to see how the whole truth comes
together so go back to those studies I
looked at at the beginning and you can
see how this applies so this is a
summary of the complaint research and if
it's a positive score more women
complained about it for some - school
more mended so he looked at that through
the gender lens and we saw a very clear
difference okay let's switch lens for a
second
let's instead of looking at the gender
lens have a look at the national culture
lens what differences to make if instead
of dividing up the respondents between
male and female you divide them up
according to what country they came from
low and behold we see a very big
difference there between the responses
of people whether they were British or
American and in fact the responses are
greater on the basis of culture than
they are gender so the average
difference in the responses of men and
women was about 9 percentage points
between Americans and Britons it was
twelve point nine percent so all the
time we're getting fixated on the gender
thing we might be missing the fact that
yes we are seeing a real difference
there's nothing false in the picture
we're seeing but we have to see that in
the context there are other things that
make differences as well and in this
case it actually seems the culture one
makes more of a difference so when I
looked at other data around this for
example I found that the complaining
pattern of a American woman was closer
to that of an American man than it was
to a British woman so you can get
carried away that gender explains it all
when you only look through that lens
when you bring up some other lenses and
you see it's more complicated than that
and this is only two lenses remember
right we could look at other things too
now if you go to this one here you don't
even have to switch lens at all once
you've got that idea in your
head that certain things are brought
into focus by certain ways of looking at
the world all you need to be aware of is
the danger of becoming fixated on
whatever it is that is being put into
focus by the explanatory frame you're
looking at and in this case I think you
just look at the data a second time and
think what hang on a minute
nine times out of ten men and women are
as likely to give the same answer as not
so take the second example right in the
71 percent of cases men 71 percent of
men and women agreed that it was morally
wrong 20 percent of men and women agreed
that it was okay there was only nine
percent of the group where they
disagreed so it's very very important
then to make sure that you can use the
different lenses and see how they work
now this is not just important for
looking at the world it's important for
looking at ourselves because the key
point is that we as individuals are also
a multiplicity of things they're just as
there are many truths about the world in
different lenses and we're bringing them
into focus so as individuals we have
different aspects so this is a medieval
gent here he looks in rather than a lens
you can think of a mirror in the
nationhood mirror he sees a Briton in a
world view mirror he sees a humanist in
a political mirror he sees a socialist
in the relationship mirror he sees a
partner gender mirror a man in in a
psychological profiling mirror I've got
to be careful of those some of those are
like those circus crazy mirrors he's an
introvert in his own mind patsies a
thinker and maybe professionally he's an
artisan now all of these things capture
something about who he is it's not the
case that he has to discover his true
self by deciding which of these
identities is actually the core of his
being and which is kind of a role he
adopts or some marquee put song it's
rather that he is the totality of all
these things and recognizing this
plurality is actually quite important
politically Amartya Sen has written very
eloquently about this in identity and
violence it's when we come to see each
other and define ourselves and each
other in terms of just one or two core
identities particularly those around
nationhood
or religion that's when you get social
division that's when you get all sorts
of problems
and it's only he says here the biggest
hope for harmony in humanity is that we
come to see ourselves in these plural
terms that's the way of coming to terms
with all we are now that's that's all
very well and all very true and I think
that's good but in understanding who we
are and the multiplicity of what we are
it's the same as the truth about the
world it can't be anything we want it to
be we're not at liberty
just as we're not at liberty to say the
truth is whatever I think it is so
ourselves are not just what we say they
are okay there we can't just throw off
or adopt aspects of self at will
we can't just deny our background as
though that we're irrelevant
we don't have to all we have to
recognize is that's just one part of our
identity it's not the whole thing nor
can we simply become what we want to be
overnight to change our personalities
acquire a talent or a skill but what we
can do again is we can look at our
different potentialities and aspects and
look at those ones we want to develop
and expand things that have potential
and actually being able to do that I
think part of anything makes us more
resilient actually because when we come
to see ourselves in terms just one thing
you know for example you know I'm a
writer or I'm a mother or whatever it
might be you're very vulnerable
something happens in your life which
challenges that identity are left
without a sense of identity so it's very
important to recognize the plurality of
what you are for resilience so just to
wrap up really is quite a simple idea
really I'm trying to get out here just
as a it's not the case that there is no
truth there are any different points of
view the sort of corollary of that view
in terms of ourselves is what you often
hear people say which is you can be
anything you want to be I don't think
that's true right you can no more be
what you want to be then the truth can
be whatever you want it to be you can't
be anything you want to be but that
doesn't matter because you can be many
things you want to be and the way to be
the many things you want to be is often
simply just to pay more attention to the
many things that you already are thanks
very much